In summary, our results reveal robust neuronal and high-gamma auditory responses during sleep in Heschl’s gyrus and also in the anterior Superior Temporal Gyrus (STG), planum polare and middle temporal gyrus—well beyond early auditory cortex. Compared with responses during wakefulness, responses during sleep were either not significantly smaller or were only moderately smaller and any response attenuations were most pronounced for late sustained responses. Responses during sleep continued to track the envelope of auditory sound waves as they did in wakefulness, and their information content was only slightly reduced compared with that during wakefulness. Functionally, the 17% difference in MI represents a moderate change; for example, a recent study examining MI in the gerbil primary auditory cortex showed a threefold decrease between responses in desynchronized and synchronized anesthesia states42. In contrast to the robust spiking and high-gamma responses observed during sleep, auditory-induced ABD was significantly smaller during both NREM and REM sleep compared with waking. Finally, entrainment of field potentials to fast stimulus modulation rates (40-Hz click-trains) was reduced during NREM sleep compared with waking, but was more comparable between the desynchronized states of REM sleep and wakefulness. Our results establish that extensive and robust auditory responses persist during sleep while ABD (power decrease) is reduced.

Some limitations of the study should be explicitly acknowledged. First, we cannot entirely rule out the contribution of epileptiform activity. However, we carefully removed epochs including signs of interictal epileptic activity from the analysis and the highly consistent results observed across patients with different clinical profiles argue against a major contribution by pathology, and we do not believe this plays a major role or affects the conclusions. Second, the number of channels used in the latency versus gain analysis was relatively small, which is suboptimal for correlation analysis; however, the observation that response latency is correlated with response attenuation during sleep is also reported in a recent comprehensive rodent study with many more electrodes20. Third, the localization of the electrodes did not permit a distinction between cortical layers.

A unique aspect of the current study which we regard as a strength is that we used a passive auditory stimulation paradigm. While this approach may have limited the extent of responses, importantly it allowed us to address changes related to sleep per se, without the confound of post-perceptual processes (for example, related to report). Using a passive listening paradigm, we find that high-gamma activation was mainly restricted to electrodes located in the temporal lobe, contrary to several studies that showed a prominent activation of the prefrontal cortex associated with a P3 wave when auditory stimulation was associated with a task27,43. Instead, our results are in line with a recent EEG study showing little frontal involvement in auditory processing44. Thus, our findings provide important data to the study of neural correlates of conscious processing in the absence of report45.

Our results demonstrate the presence of robust neuronal and high-gamma power responses in the early auditory cortex, with similar response magnitudes in sleep and wakefulness. This is consistent with recent animal20,22,23,24 and noninvasive human10,26,27,31 studies. There was a stronger attenuation during sleep for late sustained responses (Fig. 3g) and in NREM sleep compared with REM sleep, as recently observed in the rat20. Downstream from A1, responses were moderately attenuated but overall we observed robust and extensive responses during sleep across the lateral temporal lobe. In addition, spiking and high-gamma exhibited high-fidelity responses as evidenced by MI analysis and tight locking to soundwave amplitude. Several lines of evidence suggest that the gamma power responses likely represent feedforward (‘bottom-up’) processing46,47,48,49. Gamma oscillations are initiated in cortical input layer 4 and propagate to other cortical layers46. In addition, they are more readily observed in supragranular layers where feedforward projections originate46,47,48,49, they propagate from primary sensory regions to downstream high-level regions46, and blocking NMDA receptors and feedback processing boosts gamma power46. We therefore interpret our results as representing a state-invariant ‘feedforward sweep’50 in cortical sensory pathways that is tightly linked to physical stimulus features, but cannot elicit sensory awareness on its own, as is the case in unconscious43,51 conditions such as anesthesia33.

Some aspects of the auditory response in REM sleep resembled those during NREM sleep, whereas other aspects were more similar to those in wakefulness (Fig. 5 and Extended Data Fig. 9), thus mirroring the general notion that REM sleep represents a ‘paradoxical’ hybrid of NREM sleep and wakefulness. For example, some LFP/iEEG induced power changes (particularly the marked reduction in ABD) were similar across sleep states and significantly different from wakefulness. Other aspects of auditory processing such as the magnitudes of spiking responses or time-locked entrainment to fast stimulus modulation rates (locking to 40-Hz click-trains) were more similar across wakefulness and REM sleep, as observed also in a recent rat study52. Notably, NREM sleep and REM sleep share certain physiological aspects (for example, low monoamine neuromodulation and low muscle tone6) and phenomenological aspects (for example, disconnection from the external environment6). Other physiological aspects of REM sleep more resemble those in wakefulness (for example, high cholinergic tone, peripheral autonomic activation6) and the states also share certain phenomenological aspects (for example, the ability to generate conscious experience). Accordingly, we find that auditory responses in REM sleep represent a hybrid of elements observed in wakefulness and NREM sleep. Successful entrainment to fast stimulus modulation rates, which is strongest in wakefulness and REM sleep, is probably supported by desynchronized cortical activity enabled by high cholinergic tone53, which may facilitate conscious experience, including dreams.

Our results point to ABD as the most notable difference in sensory processing between wakefulness and sleep. ABD is readily observed in scalp EEG and intracranially upon auditory stimulation during wakefulness, even during passive listening41,54,55, as well as in other brain regions and sensory modalities39,56. Our results indicate that auditory-induced ABD during wakefulness is significantly disrupted during sleep (Fig. 4), as has been observed in anesthetic loss of consciousness33. Under conditions examined to date, ABD exhibits high correlation with the degree of high-gamma (although ABD is more spatially widespread) and the two phenomena can be parsimoniously described as a change in the exponent χ (‘slope’) of the 1/fχ component of the power spectrum57. However, we did not detect a significant correlation between the degrees to which sleep affected ABD and high-gamma responses in individual electrodes, in line with other auditory studies suggesting that the two phenomena may be largely independent33,41. A number of studies implicate ABD in neural feedback processing. In the macaque, gamma power propagates from V1 to V4, representing feedforward processing, whereas alpha oscillations propagate from V4 to V1, mediating feedback processing46. Moreover, alpha (8–12 Hz) and beta (13–30 Hz) oscillations are maximal in infragranular layers46,47,48 where feedback connections arise49. ABD has also been shown to mediate feedback processing during speech processing in human intracranial EEG58,59 and during visual stimulation60,61,62, and is associated with better discrimination performance in the sensorimotor network63 and with the extent of auditory percepts in an illusory auditory paradigm64. The precise source of neural sensory feedback signals remains elusive; they may arise from distant fronto-parietal regions, or thalamic and reticular thalamic circuits65. Alternatively, given that neuronal responses and ABD were predominantly observed in the temporal lobe, neuronal feedback may be generated locally in high-order sensory regions, or even in recurrent networks of early sensory cortex. Neuromodulatory systems are also likely to play a role, given their mediation of cortical desynchronization53 and sensory perception66 and their reduced activity in sleep67.

Thus, our study suggests that impaired neural feedback signaling is a key feature of sleep and of sensory disconnection, even in REM sleep (which supports rich conscious experiences). Indeed, increasing evidence suggests that sleep and anesthesia may involve disruption of feedback processes68,69,70,71. Anesthesia, and other unconscious states (for example, vegetative states72), may decouple signaling along apical dendrites of layer 5 pyramidal neurons, thereby suppressing the influence of feedback arriving at the distal dendrites73. In conclusion, our results point to disrupted neural feedback signaling as a main feature of sleep, and to dissociation of feedforward and feedback signaling as a general attribute of unconscious states and sensory disconnection.

